The Garland of Jewel Ornaments

The Stages of Meditating on the Bodhicaryāvatāra

by Rongtön Sheja Künrig

Homage to the gurus and supreme deities!

With your infinite emanations in realms beyond limit,You turn the wheel of Dharma on a vast
scale,And bring disciples to full maturity—Lord of Sages,And Mañjughoṣa, in devotion I pay
homage to you!

With your delightful discourse, wondrous beyond measure,And splendid to hear, you enthralled
the learned—Glorious Śāntideva, with all your many qualities,In devotion, I pay homage to
you!

Now, in order to benefit others, I shall explain,By gathering and condensing the key instructions,How
to meditate on the introductionTo the way of the bodhisattvas.

In the beginning, the foundation is laid through the generation of the two kinds of bodhicitta.
Then the text explains the six pāramitās (or transcendent perfections), which constitute
the training in the bodhicitta of application. Finally, any merit that has been gained
is dedicated towards enlightenment, as presented in the tenth chapter.

Among the six transcendent perfections, the first five perfections are shown to be the branches
of the transcendent perfection of wisdom, which is itself the real antidote that directly
eliminates all suffering. As the text itself says:

All these different aspects of the teaching,The Buddha taught for the sake of wisdom.Therefore
those who wish to pacify their illsShould generate this wisdom in their minds.[1]

What then, you might wonder, is the method whereby wisdom is generated? Having first developed
the wisdom of understanding the two truths, we must then focus on the aspect of relative
appearances and meditate on their emptiness, which is the absolute truth of their actual
nature. While meditating we need to take these appearances as the object of our focus, because
without focusing upon a given basis for attributes or specific qualities, we will not
be able to eliminate our misconceptions about those attributes. We must grasp well the meaning
of this statement from the Ornament of Clear Realization:

The objects of focus, all phenomena…[2]

The precious Lord Atiśa also said:

In the beginning, we must become familiar with the fact that things appear and yet lack any
true nature, like magical illusions.

When we have developed proficiency in this, the aspect of appearances will vanish like a rainbow
in the sky, and we can rest in meditative equipoise that is like the centre of space.

The way of asserting the apparent and non-apparent can also be understood from these two stages.

You should know that this, which is Lord Atiśa's way of explanation, is just how it is in reality.

The meaning of all 84,000 sections of the Dharma,Is gathered together and included fully within
this.The key pith instructions of the learned onesAre here explained, so meditate in the
proper sequence.Through whatever merit there is in this,Brilliantly pure, like the light
of the autumn moon,May all beings be freed from the ocean of conditioned existence,And arrive
at the island of liberation and omniscience.

This Garland of Jewel Ornaments describing the stages of meditating on the Bodhicaryāvatāra
was written by Rongtön Sheja Künrig at the great monastery of Pal Nālendra in the rabjung
year [i.e., the beginning of the 8th sexagenary cycle, 1447].

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2007.